Ladies and gentlemen,
I'd like to introduce Scott Morris.
Welcome to session 611.
The Learning Enterprise Is Now Open.
We have members of the
Open Knowledge Initiative from MIT,
Jeff Merriman, Chuck Shubert,
and Geoff Hulette,
and the chief architect of Sakai Project.
And I think these two projects are
representative of a sea change that's
happening in higher education today.
Institutions are working cooperatively
to build open systems that support
open specifications and open standards,
to build new digital learning
environments that are going to change
new ways or create new ways of teaching,
learning, scholarship, and research.
So I'd like to start by bringing
Charles Severance on to talk about Sakai.
Charles?
Charles Severance: Thanks, Scott.
So I'd like to start and ask,
how many people have heard
the word Sakai before?
Okay, that's about half.
It depends on the audience.
If you're in a higher education,
you've been to a couple of meetings,
it's pretty hard not to
have heard the word Sakai,
especially in the context of
learning management systems.
This is about 50-50,
probably because the other half
are real developers that sort of
do developer work for a living as
compared to people in higher education.
Sakai, I give Sakai as the project
that has the most hype award
in 2004 in higher education.
Because in higher education,
it seemed no matter where you went,
you heard about Sakai.
And I'll talk a little bit
about how that happened.
So I'd like to start and talk a
little bit about what Sakai is.
The elevator speech,
which is sort of incorrect,
is that we are the open source
learning management system.
And while that's true,
it really is much more than that.
We are a project,
we're a grant-funded project.
We also are producing a framework,
which is a way to assemble a vast
collection of tools together.
That are all collaborative in nature.
And then we have a release that's a
product that can be used both in a
collaboration and research environment,
as well as a teaching
and learning environment.
So why does Sakai matter?
Why would Sakai have to be on your radar?
Why should you care?
Well,
if you're a higher education institution,
maybe you should look
very closely at Sakai.
Sakai might be your next
learning management system.
Open source does not
necessarily mean cheap.
People think, oh, this is free.
Well, it turns out you have lots of
developers that you have to
still hire and do whatever.
For higher education,
really the value proposition comes
down to control of your own destiny
much more than free or cheap.
If you're a developer, Sakai,
once we get the installation base up,
will be a customer base with a
piece of software that needs a lot
of configuration and value add like
directory services being plugged in,
etc., etc.
And so understanding how to work
with Sakai is a potential way
to either sell your particular
learning widget or potential
just sell services around Sakai.
Content providers like publishers or
other high value content providers.
Can look to Sakai to begin to
produce highly standardized ways
to plug in not only to Sakai,
but to WebCT, Blackboard,
and other learning management
systems in a consistent way.
So if we look at the Sakai project,
we start out, yeah,
that's why we were named.
That's Hirooku Sakai from Iron Chef.
And the project we had
at Michigan before this,
we called it the Chef Project.
So we needed to come up with
a name that wasn't Chef.
But we didn't want to
call it like Chef 2.
Because then everyone would kind of say,
well, that's just Michigan's code again.
Turns out it was Michigan's code again.
But by calling it Sakai was a way
for people to wait about six months
to figure out that it was Chef.
So Sakai is the Iron Chef.
So the idea is that we take
these four institutions,
Indiana, Michigan, MIT, and Stanford.
And effectively chain ourselves
together and jump off the cliff.
Fall together for two years.
And then hit the bottom and have one
open source learning management system
that was satisfactory to all of us.
Now we took some very
unique approaches in this.
We insisted on a BSD style license.
And we took developers from
each of the institutions.
The grant turns out to be
a small part of the money.
We took developers from --
five developers from each
of the core institutions.
And they report to me.
I spend a lot of time in the air.
Because I have developers all over the
country that are working on this project.
Because we have to build this.
We have to build it for all of us.
Not just one of us.
We're not building this
for one and handing it out.
It's being built by everyone.
So overall we're about $6 million.
We're 20 FTEs.
And we have a number of
partners that are investing.
Now one of the things that happens
when you're funded through the Mellon
Foundation is it's kind of like a mark.
It's a brand.
It starts creating buzz
the moment you're funded.
So this is dated January 22, 2004.
This is less than 30
days after we're funded.
We're in the chronicling phase.
We're in the chronicle
of higher education.
And all of a sudden the CIOs and
CTOs of all these universities start
saying what's this Sakai thing?
Well there were literally hundreds
and hundreds of open source
learning management systems.
But now Sakai has kind
of risen above this.
And so we think this is a very
important thing that we can do.
And if you look at the commercial sector,
go back in the mid '90s,
lots of small commercial
learning management systems.
Then there was an industry shakeout.
And two large commercial systems.
And two large commercial
systems came out of that.
WebCT and Blackport.
There are some small ones,
Angel and Desire2Learn.
They're kind of in there in the edges
selling lower cost applications.
But at the end of the day the
industry sort of has settled
on two large powerful products.
So the first one is the WebCT.
In the open source environment,
we really have had no consolidation.
Everybody who has five or six
programmers writes their own.
Literally,
there are hundreds of different open
source learning management systems.
So in early 2004,
when Mellon Foundation bet
on us to make one that could
kind of bring order to it all,
let's build at least one that's got at
least four institutions that buy into it,
and then potentially there will be more.
Now one thing about this
project is it's only two years.
We are not going to
fund the project again.
We've not asked for any renewal
funding because it's ended.
The project was to align
the four institutions,
not to keep writing software
forever and ever and ever.
We're going to turn this software over
to an open source community at the end.
December 2005 is the end of the
Sakai project and the beginning
of the Sakai Foundation.
So you think of this kind of
crazy two-year process where
we've developed this software.
At just a feverish pace,
it's really almost like a blip
in the open source world of
learning management systems.
Hopefully going forward,
this will just be an open source product.
Michigan and others will provide
developers and will work with it.
We're going to be
running it in production,
but it really is going to become the
property of the open source community.
So for the first two
years of this project,
really?
Yeah.
We're forming the
corporation in about a week,
the Sakai Foundation Corporation,
and we're going to transfer it all
to the Sakai Foundation Corporation.
So for two years,
we had this little foot race,
and we are running it
like a small startup.
We have a very hierarchical organization.
I'm the chief architect.
Everybody reports to me.
If a decision has to be made,
I make the decision.
People get mad sometimes.
They fight in our board
meetings sometimes.
It's just like a company.
That's only how we work
for the first two years.
It turns out we're
rewriting so much software,
and it's so painful for people to
throw their learning management
systems away that we have to be very,
very agile and very,
very quick during these two years.
We hope the software we produce at
the end of the two years does not
require that kind of investment.
The future looks more like our
Educational Partners Program.
We have 80 schools who've
committed to spending $10,000 per
year to fund us to keep going.
Now what they're going to fund is
not necessarily the development,
but more the coordination of the
development of the entire community.
So we're meeting with them this week.
I get on a plane as soon as I leave
here to go to our Sakai meeting with
400 people to talk about the current
and present and future of Sakai.
We also have commercial affiliates.
We all lived through the late 90s
where everyone who had a domain name
got a million dollars and a Ferrari,
right?
Well, we don't want Sakai to be
viewed in that same way.
We carefully want to make sure that
Sakai stays an open source play,
that the University of Michigan,
Indiana University, MIT and Stanford,
we're not in this for a buck.
We all had to agree that we would
give this software away at the
end to be part of the project.
So what we do is we have
commercial affiliates.
Generally these commercial affiliates
are the ones who are going to be
the most successful in the future.
So what we do is we have
commercial affiliates.
Generally these commercial affiliates
are the ones who are going to be
the most successful in the future.
affiliates are interested in adding
value around services on selling Sakai.
For a long time we only had three
of them in their little companies.
Well recently we got a big one, IBM.
Everyone looks at IBM and says, "Whoa,
it's gonna change Sakai." Well,
let me tell you the people
at IBM that we're dealing
with are IBM global services.
They're not so interested
in changing Sakai,
they just wanna make a whole lot of money
selling you all Sakai on IBM hardware.
And so it's again the commercial
affiliates are more oriented towards
services around Sakai than they
are buying favor within Sakai.
We have Sakai meetings.
Our third one is happening this week.
This is the first one
that's open to the public.
The first two were sort of members only.
One of our patterns is to have things
members only and then open them up as
a transition to make it so that we are
truly open by the end of the project.
In the future, as I mentioned,
the grant ends 2005.
We expect a $1 to $2 million revenue
stream starting 2005 already to the
foundation to stay in the open source.
We expect that the core team is going to
be on the order of 10 programmers and not
a large set of people to do all the work.
But instead, a small set of people to
coordinate it makes sense,
coordinate QA and get releases
out on time as compared
to doing the actual work,
where today we're doing the actual work.
There's contributions
from outside the core,
but most of the work is done by the core.
In the future,
the core will be doing the release
and the QA and the consulting.
[Transcript missing]
Could I switch to demo one, please?
So what I have here is I have
what we call our quick demo.
And in our distribution,
there are two basic
pieces of distribution.
One is this demo that you simply unzip
and put on your desk and run one command,
and you've got Sakai up and running.
I carry it around on a thumb drive,
the full installation on a thumb drive.
I just made an install package
in the previous session over
there so that I could have a
Mac install package out of it.
It's really simple.
We call this the show your boss version.
Your boss says,
I've been to a conference.
I heard about Sakai.
Why don't you get it up and
running so I can take a look at it?
Five minutes later,
you go to localhost:8080, and bada boom,
you've got it.
So I want to show you a use case
scenario that kind of gives a sense
of the collaborative activity of it.
I'll log in here.
And so, I have a series of workspaces,
and these are like SharePoint sites
or it's just a context around
where information is organized.
And depending on the site I'm in,
I have a set of tools
that run down the side.
I'm going to make a site.
I'm going to create a new site.
I could create a course
site or a project site.
I'll create a project site.
I'll call this one WWDC.
And I get a set of tools,
and again this is that same set
of some collaboration tools,
some tools that are not,
that are sort of general collaboration,
others that are teaching and learning.
You can import content from other
sites if you'd created them.
I'm about to publish the site.
I'm going to make this
publicly joinable by anybody,
and I'm going to give
them an access role.
Here's where you start to see
where it's not necessarily just
about teachers and learners.
We have a lot of terminology
in there that's neutral.
Maintaining access makes sense
if you're a teacher or a learner,
but it also makes sense if you are
The Chief Graduate Students and
the Subgraduate Students,
or you're the PIs on the grant and the
graduate students working on the grant.
Maintain is the ability
to mess with the files,
and access means the
ability to write the files.
So there's this membership button
that now anyone who comes to
this site can naturally join it.
So I'm going to create the site.
And now it popped up in my site
list because I'm the maintainer
of it because I just created it.
So now we see a series of buttons,
the home button that tells you
like the chat that's going on
or the recent announcements.
I should have put the schedule on,
I forgot about that.
Announcements is a way to make
announcements and resources is a way to,
oh shoot,
I forgot I need to upload a file here.
So there's a sort of upload place.
There's a chat room
that you can work with.
There's this presentation tool that's
something I wrote that flips slides.
If you know my history,
I have this urge to
distribute presentations.
It's the thing I want to do.
But we also have WebDAV that
works nicely in Apple.
And unfortunately, we shipped before...
We shipped before 10/4,
and so our instructions have Goliath in
them because of the HTTPS Apple thing.
But now we're going to
update the instructions.
So I'm going to pop here
and just bring up WebDAV.
And I got the URL from this little site.
And so there's the file that I just
uploaded through the web interface,
and I'll just drag
another file into there.
Let's get that on.
And I'll go back.
And there is the file
that I just dragged in.
And so the resources tool
has got a web dev capability.
And so now I want to create a class.
So I'll go back to my workspace,
worksite setup,
I want to create a new one.
This time I want to create a class.
This is some information that
I'll talk about in a bit about
pre-published information about
who's what teaching what class.
And it knows who's teaching what class.
Then it goes through
the same set of steps.
Pick a different set of tools,
the assignment tool, chat room,
the drop box, the grade book, resources.
So people can act, anybody can get in,
and create the site.
So there's my course site.
Now, I was in the testing room,
and I don't know how many of you got a
chance to play with that Intel-based Mac,
but it runs this application about 70%
faster than a 2.5 gigahertz power PC.
So I'll just let you know that I'm
ordering one as soon as I get back,
because we're all Java developers.
This whole thing's written in Java,
and running Eclipse, I'm sure,
is going to be about twice as
fast as one of those things,
and they're an awful lot cheaper.
So I'm just very impressed
with that hardware.
We ran on it just fine.
As Steve said, Java just works.
So let's go back to the slides now.
So one of the things that faculty
really find enjoyable about this
software is that notion that they
can create a group of students with
four or five students just like
that with a couple of button clicks.
And that's because part of
our fundamental goal is not
just to think about this as
precisely about the courses,
but instead ad hoc teaching and
learning and ad hoc communication.
We have four sites
that are in production.
I define production as there's enough
people using it that when it goes down,
phones ring instantaneously.
University of Michigan,
Indiana University, Yale University,
and Foothill Community College.
Foothill has 35 community colleges that
are going to be using this as well.
There's a whole series of other
organizations that have published the
adoption plans for their use of Sakai.
You can go to Google and type "Sakai
adoption plans." My personal favorite
is University of California Merced,
which is, I think, right over that away.
They are a new campus,
and their learning management
system is going to be Sakai.
They're going to be Sakai
from the very beginning.
So unlike the rest of us,
they don't have to come up
with any conversion scripts.
They're just going to start
with Sakai from the very,
very first moment.
And so we think that's kind
of really a very cool adopter.
Now, technically within Sakai,
we're going to have a bunch of tools
written by a whole bunch of people.
And so we've had to build a very
robust and rich framework to
make it so that dropping one tool
in does not break another tool.
We chose technologies in Sakai that
we hoped would be comfortable in
a typical enterprise organization
that's not using Microsoft,
meaning the typical Java stuff: Java,
Tomcat, Java Server Faces.
We didn't make up too much stuff.
And it turns out it fits beautifully
inside Mac OS X Server because
there are so many pieces of
Mac OS X Server that are already there.
And we just drop in the pieces
that we need in addition,
hook up the JK connector the right way,
install the certificates, and off you go.
We support MySQL.
Out of the box.
And Oracle, which is also available on
Mac OS X Server as well.
The basic architecture of the software
is what I call a two-layer architecture.
If you remember, long, long ago,
there was this concept of
the three-layer architecture,
which seemed really good when
you first heard about it.
But the three-layer architecture
has all kinds of problems.
I could spend a lot of time talking about
why three-layer architectures don't work.
We use a two-layer architecture.
It's also called the
service-oriented architecture.
And the idea is you break at least
one place and create a very hard,
impenetrable API at that place
that you document the heck out of.
So you split between your
presentation and your persistence.
Then you publish a Java doc,
and you don't change it every day.
This isn't like I'm the programmer
writing the whole thing.
It's like one programmer
can write above the line,
and another programmer
can write below the line.
And they can communicate
through Java doc.
And we find that this solves lots
of problems with keeping persistence
out of the presentation code,
unit testing,
etc., independent development,
and very importantly for us,
reuse of code.
So our announcement tools
can post a schedule.
Our chat tool can post an announcement.
So you have all these
tools that you think,
well, there's just a chat tool.
That's just one thing.
No.
It has capabilities that
touch everything else,
and it just calls the services
for those other capabilities.
Our Sakai application framework,
I don't really have time to describe it,
but we really refactored our code in
such a way to isolate the non-portable
aspects from one web app container
to another web app container.
We're almost at the point
where with our kernel,
I can move between a servlet
container such as Tomcat and a
JSR168 container such as Pluto or
the JSR168 without changing my tool
code by just changing my kernel code.
And so we have a series of things
that we provide from the kernel.
These common services,
which are like file
systems and a presentation.
I'll talk about each of these.
And then the app developers
write some tool layout code,
some tool code,
and then their own application services.
Chat is a good example of
an application service.
This is just a simple
show of the Sakai layout.
We chose Java Server Faces.
A lot of people give me
a lot of crap about that.
Everyone says Java Server Faces
is a little young.
What we were looking for is
a really solid presentation
layer that is supported.
And we wanted to make it symmetrical.
And yeah, Java Server Faces is young.
This is layout.
It's almost like Zool
or XForms or whatever,
but it's even more pure layout.
And the key thing is you've
got to build widgets.
If you don't want to build widgets,
Java Server Faces becomes really,
really frustrating because
it's not like JSP with tags.
This is really a layout language.
It's not a bunch of macros.
And so these are very
intelligent little buggers.
And you can't just take your
average web designer and say,
"Go off and make a new one."
You can't make a bunch of JSF tags.
So we have senior
developers making the tags.
But the nice thing about it is
there's no localization issues here,
no internationalization,
no accessibility issues.
We tend to write tool code that
ignores that and delegates that.
All up to the presentation services.
And so we felt that this was a way for
us to write tools that could have a very,
very solid layer presentation,
that the layout is very clean,
and we could delegate to the
presentation services and the tag
implementations extremely complex things.
Now a lot of classic web developers
find this frustrating because
they're just used to hacking stuff.
And this is not for the faint of heart,
but we're trying to build a tool
set with literally hundreds of
tools that look and feel identical.
On the bottom end,
we provide data in through
the service providers.
That's how that course
information comes in.
We provide the role information,
the course information,
and the user information.
We have a number of user directory
capabilities in our 2.0 release.
LDAP, JLDAP, Kerberos.
on an IMS enterprise.
And so we plug in all kinds of
information from below because
we basically demand that no
one mess with our tables.
These tables are supposed
to be impenetrable.
So if you want to plug in information,
we've got an API.
You feed the information is,
then I can change this and do performance
tuning to the extent I need to here,
whereas I don't have the local code
that's in the loop for lots of queries.
So the plugins don't
replace the persistence.
They actually populate the
information as necessary.
OKI is a founding partner
of the Sakai project.
And OKI in many ways has
been the inspiration for much
of the Sakai architecture,
the service-oriented architecture,
the naming of the APIs,
the naming of the objects.
But it's important to people to
understand that Sakai is in the
business of writing a piece of
software that just works in Java and
runs fast and is convenient to use.
OKI is in the process of writing
standards that work in lots and
lots and lots and lots of languages.
And Geoff will talk more about that.
So Sakai, we're working on.
We're writing software that's
heavily influenced and makes
use of OKI where appropriate,
whereas OKI is building something
way beyond what Sakai is building.
And that is interoperability APIs that
work well beyond the Java environment.
One of the things that we've done is,
in a way, we sort of have scared
Blackboard and WebCT,
and they wanted to work with us.
And we said,
are you going to take our software
and sell services around it?
And they go, no.
And so they said,
we'd like to work with you.
And we go, OK, how can we work with you?
So we made up this IMS group,
and it turns out to be really cool.
And so what the IMS group ultimately
has turned into is working on a
standard that is effectively a light
version of Chalkbox or PowerLynx.
So if you're familiar
with WebCT or Blackboard,
this is a really elegant,
elegant approach to bringing a
tool in that's not physically
present on the same system.
And so the idea is you have an externally
hosted application that might be content,
or it might be a testing
engine or whatever.
You have a learning management system,
and then you have sort
of the end user browser.
And the idea is inside this learning
management or collaborative environment,
you have a button,
and when you push the button,
There's a web service request from
the learning management system to the
external application that gives session
and context and ID and password and role
information to this external application.
The external application returns
back some URL with magic stuff on it,
and then that URL is
put into the browser,
and then the user interacts with
the application for a while.
And then from time to time,
based on the session information,
it might do something like store a grade.
And so this is pretty clever,
because it's basically using all web
services here in just simple HTML,
and it's pretty easy
to write these things.
You can write them in PHP or
Perl or Python or anything.
All kinds of tools can come
in through this mechanism.
And usually you think of a
standards process has taken a very,
very long time.
IMS took a different approach to this.
They said,
let's just write the code first
and write the standard later.
So I'm getting on a plane in about
two weeks to go to Sheffield,
England, in Altilab,
where we'll demonstrate two tools.
Working in four learning
management systems.
WebCT, Blackboard, Sakai,
and Moodle will all be able to launch
SAMigo and a thing called Concept Tutor
from University of Wisconsin.
So this is kind of impressive,
meaning it's going to work,
and then we're going to sit down
and do all the kind of fluffy stuff
about writing the standard and
getting votes and stuff like that.
So, in summary, I'm almost done.
In summary,
if you're an educational institution,
if you're a crazy one,
you should join us.
You come be part of our party.
But if you just aren't so crazy,
just keep us on radar, watch us.
When we got 50 or 100 installations,
maybe we'll be more interesting to you.
Commercial providers, companies,
if you have a widget to deploy or if you
want to just simply provide services,
Sakai could create a market
for you that makes plenty of
money off of our customers.
And content providers,
we hope this IMS effort is going to
allow us to build things that are not
particularly in learning management
systems but highly value-added content.
One of the people we're working
with is O'Reilly and Safari,
trying to build this so we
build Safari into Blackboard,
WebCT, and Sakai all at the same time.
We've been working very closely
with Apple for quite some time.
We all carry around laptops.
I've been sort of thinking about a
commercial based on those laptops,
and actually it was an early meeting
between MIT folks and Michigan folks.
We're doing this Polycom,
and you look around the room and you say,
all these gray-haired geeks all
have laptops that are Apples.
And you say, why is it that everyone
in this room has an Apple?
And that is because we all had a choice.
So...
So basically the development of
Sakai is effectively done on Apple's.
A faster Java on the Intel hardware
would be kind of nice.
We basically run our internal
collaboration server,
collab.sakaiproject.org on
Apple hardware donated by Apple,
powered by XServe.
And basically we see potential for a
nice synergy between XServe and Sakai for
small to medium sized organizations where
they don't want to build a Linux expert.
They want to hit software update every
couple of weeks and they get all the
patches and they get the Java and
then Sakai just keeps on running.
And the fact that MySQL is there means
that almost out of the box with little
or no effort you've got a Sakai server
that stays in production without a
lot of effort and talent on your end.
So you can go to the website
www.sakaiproject.org.
There's a collab site where you can join
any of our groups and see what's going on
inside Sakai at collab.sakaiproject.org.
We have a couple of mailing
lists that you join there.
And we're announcing
maclearningenvironments.org which is
not up yet but basically it's a way for
us in this community to work together.
We're waiting until our 2.0 release
comes out and then going to put a
nice skin on it and bring it up.
So our 2.0 release is going to come
out June 15th and so the site's up.
If it's there we're probably
testing it up to the 2.0 release.
You can take a look at it and
instructions will be there on how to join
the groups and what groups are there etc.
etc.
So with that I'm going to
turn it over to Jeff Merriman.
We'll do questions at the very end.
Thank you very much, Chuck,
and thank you for leaving.
Plenty of time.
Chuck's already done a very good job,
I think,
of introducing you to OKI and how it's
different from a project like Sakai.
Sakai is really about, as you know now,
if you didn't already,
open source software,
open source CLE for higher
education and other domains,
and about the community.
OKI really is about open standards,
open specifications,
and our concern is open systems.
Sakai was, I mean,
OKI was one of the founding,
was really a foundational project
from which Sakai and a number
of other projects have evolved,
Sakai being one of the most important.
But we are, we are,
have a different agenda,
which we're going to talk about.
Sakai started, really, I mean,
OKI started, really, in early 2000,
when a number of institutions started
talking about how to solve some
very fundamental issues about the
way that software integrates into
a complex educational environment.
It really started with conversations
amongst those of us at MIT and Stanford.
I was at Stanford at the time,
and I'm at MIT now.
Who were creating enterprise
environments and trying to sort
through all the various kinds of
educational software that we wanted
to run in those environments.
And finding it was kind of difficult.
And finding that the specifications
or interoperability standards,
you know, were not as good as they
were supposed to be.
And finding that the standards necessary
to do it well really didn't exist.
Even the IMS Global Learning Consortium,
who, for those of you who are
familiar with that organization,
Chuck's already mentioned it,
IMS at the time was building and
promoting data exchange specifications.
What we needed were
integration specifications.
And that's what,
that's what OKI set out to do.
Initially funded through
a grant from the Andrew W.
Mellon Foundation,
they became interested very early on.
It was an organization
that has funded Sakai.
And immediately we gained a number
of educational collaborators.
You can see the list on the screen.
Folks who have the same vision,
the same concern.
How do we take all kinds
of educational software,
whether it's desktop, you know,
client-side software
to web-based systems,
and get them to integrate together
seamlessly in an enterprise environment.
You'll see, of course,
that four of the founding partners are
also the four founding institutions.
The institutional partners of Sakai.
And very early on we partnered with
the IMS Global Learning Consortium.
We wanted to make sure the
work we were doing would be
dovetailed with the work of IMS,
would help to lead that
community and be informed by it.
And eventually the idea is to give
the OKI specs over to the community,
which we're actually starting to do now
with the IMS Global Learning Consortium.
So OKI has really one
primary deliverable.
The product of OKI are a set
of specifications that we call
Open Service Interface Definitions,
which Chuck has already referred to,
OSIDs.
They really are specifications that
define how enterprise services in
a service-oriented architecture
sort of paradigm can be plugged
into applications for various
kinds of interoperability goals.
They are interface specifications.
For Java, they're bound as Java APIs.
You're going to learn about what we're
doing for Objective-C in a little bit.
But we are defining these abstractly.
We're coming to agreements
with the community at a
service-oriented architecture,
very abstract level about, you know,
here's the kinds of services
that educational software needs,
here's how we factor them,
and now here's how we do
this in various technologies.
The goals of this,
motherhood and apple pie, right?
We're trying to reduce costs.
We're trying to set ourselves up for the
future where we know at places like MIT,
certainly, technology changes.
And how do we change technology
in an education system?
We're trying to create an educational
environment so that we can mitigate
the change across the board,
right?
How do we change out an entire
authorization infrastructure without
having to touch all the apps?
And that's really what
we're setting out to do,
this whole plug-in notion,
which we'll talk about.
We're trying to increase
opportunities for collaboration.
Sakai is obviously doing
a lot in that area.
But beyond Sakai,
with the commercial sector,
with the open source sector,
how can we get these things to work?
How can we get these things
to work well together?
And really, we talk about this a lot.
What we want to see for educational
software is a marketplace of software,
where in the end, as an end user,
you should be able to
go and choose products,
whether they're open
source or off-the-shelf,
shrink-wrapped products,
and know that they can run in an
environment that they really weren't
necessarily initially designed for.
Initially,
we released the Java API versions of
the spec back in the spring of 2003.
Those began to enjoy
some limited adoption.
We got more adoption as
we moved to version 2,
fixed a lot of things that
were wrong with version 1.
And in fact,
now we're planning the version 3 release,
which will probably come
out later this year.
But one thing that we did announce
just today is the release of our
new Objective-C bindings of the
Open Service Interface definitions,
primarily, obviously,
for the Mac OS X developer community,
primarily in the open source community.
And we're going to be doing
that in concert with the
Mac Learning Enterprise community
that's now beginning to form.
And we think this is an
important thing for OKI.
I'm going to turn over to Chuck Schubert,
who's going to talk more about OSIDs.
Thank you very much, Jeff.
I'll be back.
Jeff will be back.
So what's an OSID?
Think API.
If you think API, you're pretty close.
What we're going to do in the
next few minutes is take a look
at a couple of examples of the
kinds of ways you use OSIDs.
And the way you use OSIDs will
be instructive on what they are.
One of the first things that we're
going to look at here is the case
of having clusters of compute nodes
that are available for being able to
Be used by people,
students in the MIT environment.
We have, at last count,
about 150 clusters at MIT.
Some are small.
Some are fairly large.
We decided that we wanted to
attack this particular situation
because there are no current...
mechanisms for us to be able to make
these facilities available to students
and others that are in the MIT community.
So we want to be able to have a
situation where we have a client
sitting with a laptop being able to
access a bunch of computers that are
sitting behind some sort of wall.
In this particular case,
we have a couple of things that we
really wanted to try on the initial
program that we put together.
One of the things was that we wanted to
look at finding out who people were and
look at an authentication situation,
and we wanted to find out what they could
do or look at an authorization situation.
We had a set of cluster
services that we wanted to put
together and make available.
We didn't want to bind those to
any particular back-end cluster.
We have lots of Linux clusters that
run Rocks and other scheduling systems,
and we have
The Apple clusters that run Xgrid.
And so we're really interested
in having something that's a
little more general purpose.
We could have chosen to write these
as a single monolithic application.
What we did instead was choose OSIDs
as the way we wanted to deal with that.
So we wanted to create a set of APIs.
An OSID has the ability to serve as
a plug-in from the standpoint of the
particular implementations of the
technologies that are underneath,
and it also has the ability
to serve as an API for the
applications that are using it.
So it's really an abstract definition
of how these things should fit together.
We chose for our particular initial
test of this an Apple cluster.
We chose X509 certificates
for authentication,
finding out who you are.
We decided to build a small
little authorization system,
and we had a scheduler that we
put behind our cluster services.
We wanted to make these so that
later on we could kick in to
Kerberos or some other kind of thing.
For the authentication,
we wanted to be able to use our local
roles database for the authorization
for what students could do,
and we wanted to be able to
make things generally useful,
cluster services generally useful.
In that vein, we've done a demonstration.
I'd like to turn over the situation
to the presentation to Geoff Hulette,
who works with me at MIT,
to talk about one of our
implementations of this.
Hi, I'm Geoff Hulette.
I'm going to show you a really quick
demo of an application that we wrote
internally at MIT that uses two OSIDs,
the authentication and
the authorization OSIDs.
And this is just basically
just like Chuck was saying.
What we were looking for here was
authentication and authorization,
so who you are and what you
can do in this application.
And so we basically wrote a web
application that's going to let you
allocate nodes on a cluster and then
construct a Mathematica script that
you then download and use to connect
Mathematica running on your desktop
to the cluster on the back end.
And actually, so this demo is,
at this point in the demo,
we've actually already used the OSID,
so it's pretty transparent.
You can see up in the corner,
this web application knows who I am.
That's hitting the authentication,
the who you are part OSID.
And that's using X.509.
And you can see there's the table
of Mathematica nodes up there.
And that's going to look
at my authorization,
which is going to tell this application
how many nodes I can allocate.
Now, the OSID story here is
that if we wanted to swap,
we're using X.509 for authentication.
And our own kind of
SQL tables for authorization.
If we wanted to,
we could very easily swap out the X.509,
say, for a Kerberos implementation.
If you already had that implementation,
all you would have to do is just drop
in that bundle into this application and
change like a line in the config file,
and you would be running on
Kerberos instead of X.509.
So that's a big benefit
from our perspective.
So I'm just going to run
through this really quickly.
At this point,
I'm going to go ahead and allocate two
nodes on our cluster back in Cambridge,
Massachusetts.
So you can see it's constructing
the script as we're doing this.
So this is going through
the authorization.
Every time I do this, it's asking,
you know, am I at my maximum, you know,
we could ask questions like
where could I allocate the nodes.
It's not built in because we
only have one cluster we're
really dealing with here.
So I have two nodes allocated now.
And I'll go ahead and
download the script,
Mathematica script.
So I execute this.
This is actually a
better Mathematica demo.
This goes ahead and uses the
Mathematica parallel toolkit to connect.
This is connected to our XServe cluster.
And so now you're actually
running Mathematica here.
We're connected to a
cluster on the back end.
And I'm just going to
run a really quick demo.
This is just going to factor a range
of integers in parallel on the cluster.
So ta-da.
And that's it.
Turn it back over to Chuck.
Thank you, Geoff.
If we could go back to the slides,
please.
So the OSID technology is, in fact,
something that is--
An abstraction layer that
allows you to do the kinds of
things that we've just seen.
We could go beyond what we've
shown with authentication and
authorization to another set,
a more complete set of
APIs that we've defined.
So these are the OSIDs that are
currently shipping in version 2.
There are kind of two types of OSIDs.
One are the common services that are
independent of an educational system.
The other is the educational services.
And we'll see now a
As soon as I get through
describing this last thing,
a demonstration of the
repository API.
We've moved this into
a very abstract level.
We initially started out with our
definitions of the OSIDs being in Java.
We had as a design goal going
through the development of the
OSIDs that we would be language
independent as possible with Java.
We had in mind being able to
do bindings in other languages.
So in the last six to 12 months,
we have gone from having
Java only to being able to
have other language bindings.
We've done this by casting the OSIDs,
the abstract definitions, in XML.
The XML we're calling OSIDs, there's a
An XML schema to define
what an OSID looks like.
And we've abstracted the language
dependent part and put that into an
XSLT translation for individual things.
We have translations, of course,
into Java so we can see that we can
make the round trip from starting
in Java and getting back there.
We've also got, in the last few days,
we've released an initial version
of the Objective C language binding.
We've got other language bindings
that we've been working on,
and they've been very
instructive in making the exoSIDs
much more general purpose.
The exo-sids in Objective-C have
two kinds of things.
One is the definition of the o-sids
themselves that are in a framework,
an Objective-C framework
rather than a Sakai framework.
And the other is that we have
individual implementations that
are put in other frameworks.
The major loading aspect of being
able to put a dynamic bind between
the OSID and some implementation,
whether in authentication it might
be X509 or Kerberos or what have you,
is through a loader.
And the loader checks to make
sure that the managers of the
implementation meet the definitional
managers in the XOSID definitions.
We have another example of the kinds
of things that we're doing here,
and that is I'm going to turn over to
Geoff to be able to talk about that.
Geoff Huette: Thanks, Chuck.
So you saw with the HPC demonstration,
the point there is we're trying
to build the software so that
these kinds of underlying services
can be plugged in and replaced.
The benefit, of course,
being that as we change technologies,
we can change those fairly easily.
Another benefit being as we want
to share these applications across
institutions that might have
different sorts of infrastructures,
that should become easier as well.
So really, again,
this marketplace of applications,
of plug-ins,
is something we're trying to build.
Chuck showed you the list of the OSIDs.
One of the OSIDs that's really
getting a lot of traction right now
in the industry and the open source
community is our repository OSID.
And I'm going to show you a couple
demos that use that and show off some
of the other features of the approach.
First of all, the world of repositories,
certainly in higher education,
is a very complex one.
These days,
faculty and students alike want to
access lots of content from lots
of different kinds of applications.
So typically what we see today are
applications that are sort of bound
to a particular repository of content.
And with the OSID approach,
we're trying to break that.
The problem with breaking that
is that it's a complex world.
Imagine this poor laptop here
sitting in an environment like
MIT's or Michigan's or wherever,
running a computer.
And you're running an app that wants to
access content in various repositories.
Well, you have repositories
that are institutional.
You have digital library
systems that are institutions.
We have published material that you
might be subscribed to that might be
out there on the internet someplace.
All kinds of things.
You might even have local content,
content that you slip a DVD disc
into your machine and you want
to access that from the same app.
Complex world.
What makes it more complex is that
there are lots of standards out there.
In the repository space.
There's a lot of protocol standards.
Things like SRW,
the Search and Retrieve Web Service,
that's being promoted by
the library community.
Things like DRI, the Digital Repository
Interoperability Spec,
built by IMS Global Learning Consortium.
You have folks doing things with SOAP,
with other kinds of web services,
some proprietary, some other.
And of course there's lots of
content standards out there.
Things like IMS Content Packaging,
Dublin Core, Score, and so on.
SCORM, we can go on.
Very complex.
What we're trying to do with the OSes
is help make that world a little more
palatable for the poor application
that wants to take advantage of it.
I'm going to show an
app called Search Party.
Search Party,
this is sort of an initial build of it.
It's something being developed by the
Mac Learning Environments Project.
Brian Bias, one of the developers who's
really taken the lead on this,
is working with that.
And Search Party is one of the
first Cocoa apps out there that
actually takes advantage of the OSes.
Now it's taking advantage of Java,
the Java versions yet.
We haven't quite gotten to the point
where we can use the Objective C.
But this diagram,
similar to the ones that
Chuck was showing earlier,
sort of gives an idea of what's going on.
Here are, here's Search Party running
on the machine.
And here are a whole bunch
of repositories that it
might want to get access to.
Search Party allows you to do federated
search across multiple resources.
And it's a great way to get access to
multiple repositories and bring back the
content into your Mac OS X environment.
Well, gosh, there's lots of those things.
Through the plug-in model and the
ability through the OSes to actually
load multiple implementations
into a single app at any one time,
we've helped make this
easier for Search Party.
So in this diagram you see
there's a plug-in I call SRW.
That's actually using the Search and
Retrieve Web Service standard,
which allows us actually to plug
into a number of repositories
that support that standard.
And we can do that all do.
There's a product called
Harvest Road Hive.
Harvest Road, you saw,
was one of the Sakai partners.
The Hive is a repository product.
Harvest Road's a company in Perth,
Australia.
It's a real nice product.
And we wanted to plug that in.
In fact, Mac education,
the Mac learning environment folks
were starting to talk to Harvest
Road as they did Search Party.
And there's others.
There's the Fedora
Digital Repository System,
which is a library system.
Open source that's been created.
There's a company in Italy called
Junty Interactive Labs that has another
learning object repository product.
And the idea was, you know,
if we could start building
plug-ins for these things,
we could make the life of an app
like Search Party much easier.
And really put the hands of
integration into the end user.
I just want to be able
to get the plug-in,
install it like I'd
install a printer driver,
and just have it work.
The story gets more interesting
as you bring more apps into play.
There's a tool that will not
be shipping with Sakai 2.0,
but we hope to ship with something like
Sakai 2.1 or a fairly immediate release.
A tool currently codenamed Twin Peaks.
I don't know if it will
be called that in the end.
But Twin Peaks is really
the same kind of thing,
but for Sakai.
It's a tool that allows you to
search across various repositories
of content and bring those
into your Sakai environment.
What we can do with the O-sids is
As a system administrator,
you can grab the same plug-in,
the same basic jar,
and bring it into the Sakai
environment to drive Twin Peaks,
the same one that you'd use to
bring into a Mac OS X environment
to drive Search Party.
So we're really trying to, with the OSIS,
to have a model where we can
have that kind of choice and
that kind of flexibility.
If we go back to Demo 3...
Demo 3.
Thank you very much.
First thing I'm going
to show is Search Party.
This is it.
Like I say,
it's sort of an early release.
It's pretty nice as it is,
but there's a lot of ideas we
have to make it even better.
It's a slick little Cocoa app that
allows you to load in repositories.
There's sort of four loaded in here.
And to basically search
across them to find content.
The four we have,
two actually exist at MIT,
part of the Visualizing Cultures project,
which is really a growing collection
of art images from mid-1800s and
late-1800s Japan for teaching history.
The other two are plug-ins that we
got from Harvest Road themselves,
hitting against two demo
sites actually in Perth,
Australia,
that we hope are running right now.
So we can do the demo.
The thing about the Harvest
Road sites is they kind of gave us
two sites with identical content.
One nice thing I can do
here is I can disable one.
Otherwise, we'll do the search,
and we'll get multiple
versions of the stuff.
So I'm just going to
search across these three,
and we'll try something.
[Transcript missing]
I don't think it did yet, but we'll see.
I guess I downloaded a lot of
these Maverick images already.
Oh well, maybe it did show up,
I just didn't notice.
But I can click on one here,
I can show it in the
finder at this point.
You can imagine this app being able to
send these things off to the various
iLife and iWork type apps that might
want to have access to this content.
There's a little helicopter image.
Let's see if this is, I thought I had...
Huh,
I thought I had three in there already.
But anyway, you get the idea.
So SearchPro is a nice little app.
Scott can probably talk a little
more about the Mac learning
environments plans for this app,
but they want to certainly
move it forward under an open
source community through the
Mac learning environment community.
I'm going to show one more demonstration
that ties this session together,
I hope.
You should recognize this.
It's actually,
I'm running Sakai version 1.5.1 here.
I didn't have access to the cool new one.
There's a project that I mentioned
earlier called Twin Peaks.
It was developed at Indiana University.
And it's a little UI widget that
allows you to go in and populate
various things in Sakai with
content from an external source.
And I have it running.
I've created a little Sakai site here,
a little OKI 101 worksite
with an announcements tool.
I could have added more tools.
I just added an announcements tool to it.
And I can, I have one announcement
in here called test.
I can add a new announcement
called another test.
And I can write some
things like this is a test.
And let's say I wanted this
announcement to include content
from an external source.
And I can write some
things like this is a test.
And let's say I wanted this
announcement to include content
from an external source.
And I can write some
things like this is a test.
And let's say I wanted this
announcement to include content
from an external source.
Well, what Indiana did with Twin Peaks is
they created a little widget here,
a little icon I can click on.
Well, what Indiana did with Twin Peaks is
they created a little widget here,
a little icon I can click on.
But basically it brings up,
and we need to pretty
this up a little bit,
but it brings up a search window.
And it allows me to choose
from a number of sources,
which you may not be
able to read in the back,
but they include some of the ones
we've already been looking at,
like the Harvest Road Hive.
So I can use that, and I can do a search.
Let's see,
what did I do the search for earlier?
WAVE.
and let this go.
And again, the point here,
this is the exact same plug-in that
resulted in that Harvest Road repository
choice showing up in that menu item.
And that this Twin Peaks tool is now
going and somewhat slowly doing a search,
again, to the same Harvest
Road repository in Perth,
Australia.
And if we're lucky,
it'll come up pretty soon.
The network's been a
little slow around here,
and who knows what's
happening in Australia.
And this brings up a nice little,
what we call,
lightbox view that allows you
to sort of choose from thumbnail
images of these various things.
And I think this might have
been the one I got earlier.
I can add this content now,
and I can go and I can post.
This announcement, and when I look at it,
it brings it up and it says,
here's the message, this is a test.
You can click here to get
to the Mavericks image,
and it just works.
That's the exact same
mechanism going on the back,
using OSI interface,
talking to the repository.
So the plug-in model we
think is really powerful,
and what we're showing here
is that it's working in two
very different kinds of apps.
One's a Cocoa app,
happens to be talking to Java VM,
but it's a Cocoa app running on a client.
One is a web app running
off a web server.
So there you go.
Let's go back to the slides,
and we'll finish up.
So, let's quickly talk about
some of the adoption issues.
First of all, we think the OSIDs,
as you can imagine,
have a lot of value for developers,
both commercial and non-commercial.
They really begin to define some critical
pieces of service-oriented architecture
specifications that allow for these kinds
of interoperability that you're seeing.
We're trying to help
developers factor products.
I mean, Sakai is a really good example of
a system that's factoring itself
pretty much along the OKI model.
To prepare itself for this
kind of enterprise integration,
integration with other kinds of services.
It's important, we think,
especially for the vendor community,
and even for the open source community,
to begin to think about how
the products are going to fit
into existing infrastructure,
existing services that
customers might have.
Obviously,
a lot about integration going on here.
We're trying to encourage an environment.
Through this marketplace
we're talking about,
to reduce the coupling
between components.
So, again, if you can go out and buy a
product off the shelf and bring it
into your enterprise environment,
just have it work, right?
That's what we want.
And, of course, code reuse.
Chuck talked about it.
It's really important to us,
especially with small development teams,
that we can reuse as much
of this stuff as possible.
And these specs help
us to do some of that.
For institutions,
if you're from an institution here,
you know,
a lot of people are thinking about
what is the e-learning infrastructure.
Typically,
you start out with a set of apps
that tend to be your infrastructure.
At places like Michigan and
MIT and Stanford,
we've been building
infrastructure for years.
Not four years, but for many years.
And, you know, we've learned a lot.
And the OSITs help us to define
a service-oriented approach
to these kinds of things.
We're finding it's really easy with
this model to begin to scope projects.
Who are you going to
put on various tasks?
Chuck mentioned this as well.
You need to write an implementation
against enterprise infrastructure.
You need to write a tool, right?
What are the pieces of those things?
What can the tool developer just
not have to worry about because it's
being taken care of by infrastructure?
Call the OSIT and it just works.
We've already seen some people
generating RFPs based on this.
You know, you can really become much
more particular with vendors.
You know,
what is it your product needs to support?
Why don't you support this OSIT if you're
going to integrate in our environment?
That kind of thing.
And, obviously,
one of the original things, you know,
how do you open a path for multiple
products in the environment?
LMSs and collaborative learning
environments are great,
but they're one piece
of a larger picture.
We want to bring all kinds of apps
into our educational environments
that just work together and to
serve various kinds of purposes.
[Transcript missing]